Well, hello, Richard.
It's good to continue our discussion.
You know, in our previous discussion,
we sort of started
the discussion of reincarnation.
We looked at the evidence
for reincarnation, these extraordinary
children from around the world.
We began to unpack that evidence into a
deeper understanding of the rhythms
of life and the stages of human evolution
that reincarnation makes possible.
The restoration
of the theme of the meaningfulness
of the challenges that we find embedded
in our life,
and the opportunity to actually
deepen our therapeutic interventions
in the places where we are stuck,
the places where we're holding pain,
that are rooted in our deeper history.
So now, today, we take it farther.
We begin to look deeper
into the significance of what are we?
What's the significance of the fact
that we are reincarnating beings,
in the universe that obviously
supports and nurtures,
and created this reincarnation dynamic?
That's a huge difference.
Isn't it?
Like,
to be living in a universe that is
nurturing us, you know, that has a kind
of paternal/maternal energy, you know,
surrounding it.
That has
such a different framework
to be born into?
Yeah.
And, you know,
I want to mention at the outset,
that sometimes reincarnation thinkers
go in a direction of thinking that - every
little bitty thing in our life has
a determined quality,
a deterministic quality.
But I don't think we necessarily need
to go there, because chance is one of the
powerful elements of this universe.
And so we can affirm meaning,
and we can affirm intentionality
without putting every detail of our life
into that press,
and ask, 'Well, what's the meaning of this
and what's the meaning of that?'
to affirm a larger scope of meaning.
Still, in a world where there are chance,
and there are variables
and there are uncertainties.
What's important, I think,
is understanding that the universe
pays attention to how we respond
to chance events, as well as intentional
events, that our learning and the quality
of our response is carried forward
and does us credit,
regardless of the origin
of the challenges that we're facing.
Yeah, absolutely.
I just, funnily enough, today,
recorded a short meditation.
And in it I asked people to kind
of imagine the universe, with its--
with-- criss-crossed
by its fields of Karma,
you know, almost these ley
lines through time and space,
that kind of have this karmic energy,
they're rippling. And the whole of the
cosmos is rippling with these fields.
And then I asked each
person-- well I asked
whoever's meditating,
to send out one really beautiful thought.
Like, just from the depth of their soul,
send out a really beautiful
thought into that, and see the universe
respond to that and see how it enters
the field. And how the universe
maybe kind of sighs and expands.
And how it reaches every single tiny area,
almost like it opens up synapses
in some way. And just the power of--
the incalculable power
of something like that, you know,
dropped into the ocean of time space.
You know, I found that,
like, a really powerful
contemplation to do.
Yeah.
Absolutely, I agree.
That's been very much my experience
and my own work with psychedelics.
There was nothing that I did,
working at deep levels,
that was mine alone, that was private.
And that the pain came from a larger
collective web, and the healing spread
out into a larger collective web.
And
that really those exercises,
the meditations that you're describing,
I think really are important for changing
the thought of a tilt in how we
live in the universe, because
according to just our physical senses we
have this feeling often
that life happens to us.
Life is something independent
of us and then it just happens to us, and
then we're victims of it and we respond.
But when you begin to
send out energy into the universe,
when you begin to send out healing
and love into the universe,
and you watch the universe respond
in immediate and then indirect ways,
then you begin to shift into a-- the sense
that you are living in a dynamic field.
You are part of a dynamic field,
living in a field.
And at the very deep level,
on the subtle level,
you are creating your universe as you go.
Once you begin to understand that,
still, it doesn't mean you're free of all
the karma that's coming
at you from the past.
It's still working its
way through the system.
But, increasingly,
the balance of your life tilts
from being kind of the passive recipient
of things that you personally didn't
start, to being the generator
of the life that you are inheriting now.
Yeah.
You're no longer a victim.
You're a creator, yeah? Participator.
Creator, yes.
We got this great question
that thought that we'd
kind of inject into this talk, which is
- what happens to us when we die?
So shall we-- let's explore
that, I mean you know that
other-- many other cultures--
I think we wanted to mention the Tibetans
because they seem to really have a handle
on some of these things.
Egyptians as well, but,
you know, Tibetans, perhaps
are a little bit more contemporary
because they're still here.
They're still practising very much
those teachings, the Bardo teachings.
And psychotherapists are now
exploring this territory.
Joel Whitton's first book 'Life
Between Life'
explored this. And Michael Newton's work,
and his books 'Journey of Souls'
and 'Destiny of Souls' are very
systematic attempts to explore
through deep states of regression,
of spiritual regression,
what happens to people when they
go through the death process.
So, really, we've got two halves of life.
We've got birth to death,
and then we've got birth-- death to birth.
And we've been missing this side.
But really you have to understand
the whole circle
to really understand what happens.
So, yeah, let's jump into it.
Yeah.
So obviously
you know the Tibetans
have coined this phrase 'The Bardo',
which is this in between state.
But it can also be used to describe
a transformational
experience, you know because
that's-- life is filled
with transformational experiences.
But particularly when you're moving
through a threshold, across a threshold,
you know, like death or birth are classic
thresholds,
and they sit there as kind of almost
an allegory of all transformation,
don't they?
Death and birth.
Because we have so many deaths and births,
even within one lifetime.
So
it seems like
a kind of obvious logic to expand that
allegory out beyond individual births,
and see it everywhere
throughout the entire Cosmos.
And I know you've experienced this very
profoundly in your psychedelic journeys.
Like this constant-- you've described,
like, those constant
states of transformation that-- or
you've been through them.
In those-- do you know what I'm
pointing to, this constant rebirth?
Yeah.
Yes, I mean when I started the work,
I thought there was just one death--
ego death, that would then launch
you into the spiritual universe.
But what I found is, of course,
the spiritual universe has many,
many layers to it.
And just because you're operational
at certain layers doesn't mean you're
operational yet at deeper layers.
And you actually have to go through
another metamorphosis of death
and surrender to be reborn into that
'nother layer, and so on, and so forth.
And that reflects
the Tibetan idea of Bardo.
Bardo really means a discrete
layer of consciousness.
And so when they're describing
the after-death journey, there are
multiple Bardos that manifest themselves.
Now we in the West have tended to use
the term Bardo to expand on that,
and basically let the Bardo represent
the sum total of all things that happen
to us when we die, on the other side.
And that's a perfectly acceptable,
you know, use of the term.
But their use of it is in terms
of stages of that progression.
So there's one Bardo,
you pass through another Bardo,
you pass through--
there's the Bardo of the Hungry Ghost,
to the Bardo of the Heavenly Spirits,
and things like this.
But the basic pattern I
think that they identified,
is the same pattern that the
psychotherapists are identifying too.
That when we die,
we go through a period of reunion
with our soul,
with our-- and our soul lineage.
And the first thing that takes place
is that we debrief
from our most recent life.
We basically
process
the life that we just lived, in
the context of absolute love
and a love so deep it's not
even a matter of forgiveness.
But we experience
the totality of our life,
all of our shortcomings, all of our good
deeds, in the context of infinite love.
And we have the opportunity
to look at our life and see what we did
well and see what we didn't do well.
And we have the whole notion, don't we,
of like, the 'life flashing before you
as you die', like, this kind of replay
in the timeless dimension.
You know, because there's-- so
it makes perfect sense,
like, for us to go through that
deep reflection at the end of something.
And it's what we do in life, right?
Yeah.
I think that with the near-death
experience of a life-review,
is a snapshot of what happens,
kind of, in a full death experience of
a-- just a detailed reliving
of every detail, every nuance.
Far more details than we can keep
track of inside time and space.
And we see how our life rippled
out and touched other people.
We experience how our evil deeds hurt
and how our good deeds helped.
And so we experience the totality
of our life in the seamless fabric.
And we experience them
without a physical body.
So we experience them in a subtle
body which is much more intense.
You know like the Astral Body,
or as it's so called, or the Mental Body,
these subtle layers, the Causal Body,
you know. Without the physicality,
the intensity of those emotions that we
probably feel, or we review,
have given rise to this notion of,
like, eternal damnation from,
you know, the Christians, for example.
Or even, like, the eternal bliss
realms of the Buddhas-- the Buddhists.
Or heaven and hell and, you know--
because there's this sense of eternity.
I think it's a correct intuition,
because
when there's no-- when you're out of time
and space, in that sense,
you're in that place of grace,
then an experience
of, you know, the harm you've caused or
the hurt you've caused
could feel like it--
you know, in that moment, in that timeless
space, could feel like it's infinite.
You know, 'I've caused, like, an intense
pain,' and then seeing the ripple
of that pain into a life, and
how it carries on through that being,
and then finally gets worked out.
I mean I don't know how-- what level we
experience that,
but I imagine we experience
a lot of the subtler dimensions
of our karmic,
you know, the repercussions of our karma.
They're pretty-- very intense!
Yeah. But then what locks in this
experience,
this phenomenology of eternity,
what locks it in as a metaphysical
principle is the mistaken view
that we only live once.
So we've had our chance, and there's
absolutely no chance to correct it.
So if you're going to be accountable,
and if you're going to,
you know, be accountable to good,
and you've screwed up, then you're
punished forever, and ever, and ever.
And of course, fortunately,
no one finds that when they actually
get into the deep-- the depth of it.
The past-life therapists don't find
that, the Buddhists don't
find that. That we do--
we are accountable, we are responsible,
we do experience the pain we cause
others, but that's so that we can learn,
and that's so that we can come back and do
better next time,
and better next time, and grow, and grow.
Yeah, I mean, I'm from a lineage of
distillers in my family.
And so
I like the-- you know, I look at it-- this
is my intuitive
reading of perhaps
you know a colourful way of maybe
how this happens, is that
there's a distilling process,
and in that-- or
a fermentation of some form.
So that the grosser matter starts
to fall down back to Earth in a way.
Like this is the notion of having these
subtle bodies, where the lower
bodies, the Astral, you know,
those lower
energies that we've created,
fall back into the lower plains, and then
something higher gets crystallised.
The distillation of our life.
All that was good about it, all that we've
learned is being distilled
into this purer,
kind of quintessence, that then stays
and adds to our soul's trajectory.
But then the lower--
all that kind of elemental energy
that sinks back into those
lower planes of being,
they also carry our Karma,
those droplets, if you like, of karma,
sink back down and they-- you know, we
still have to redress them.
Although they-- my understanding is
that they move into the
collective field as well.
So, every act
or every word we speak, let's say,
or every thought we have,
goes into the collective.
So
that, you know, we are all co-creating
the karma of humanity,
the collective karma of humanity.
And then we have to return
to pick up where we left-off.
But we have this
enhanced soul,
you know, this-- that
we've learned from.
So when we return,
there's more awareness present.
So there is this continuity,
you know, and the other way I see it is
that there's-- you know, our
lives are trajectories.
They're like arcs.
I say there's an arc.
It's like an arc.
It's curving.
It's always moving.
If you looked at it, it might be a spiral,
or it might have one of these
Kundalini shapes underneath it.
It's not a straight line.
And that is what we--
that's what never ends, that arc.
We follow that arc and it goes
through the portal and it continues.
And that's the lineage.
If you're able to trace that arc
in your inner being,
then you can trace your lineage, where
you've come from and where you're going.
And your memory can travel down that arc,
your awareness can travel down that arc,
which enables you to remember, or
to predict, in the case of Tibetans,
to predict where you'll return,
because the awareness is aware of
the arc, not just in its own life.
Because if you look at an arc,
within one life, it may do that.
But then if you can see it-- if you
can project it beyond this life,
you can then-- you know your
awareness can predict
intuitively where you're coming back,
can even maybe even further than predict?
Maybe it can even create,
you know, where you are going
to return, in some respect.
So anyway that's-- those are ideas, yeah.
You know I've never been very interested
in tracing my genealogy,
but I have been interested
in tracing the genealogy of my soul,
which is what you're describing. Just
reaching back and basically what you
might think of as deep remembering.
Remembering who you are,
who you have been.
And when you do that,
you do have a certain sense of trajectory,
of kind of developmental process.
And your pointing to the collective,
I think, is absolutely right.
What we're learning is the individual
and the collective are evolving together.
They are functionally separate systems,
but they are deeply intertwined.
So everything we are
doing as an individual
seeds the growth of the collective,
and everything the collective is doing
seeds the growth of the individual.
So that when I leave,
I really do believe that when I leave
space-time, when I die, and even if I were
to leave the entire system altogether,
all of my experiences, all of your
experiences will be held in perfect--
I won't say duplication,
because we are human beings and everything
we experience,
the human species gets to hold onto,
and therefore our life experience
becomes part of its life experience.
Our love and understanding becomes
part of its love and understanding.
And it is part of its generative matrix,
out of which it gives birth to the next
generation of human beings.
So it's a 'both hands' situation here.
It's beautiful,
the notion of the Akashic field,
that just-- that is constantly
remembering and growing.
I love that idea.
And, you know, another idea I really like
is the notion that comes from the Tibetan
s as well, this notion they call Terma,
which-- my interpretation of it is
a word I might use as transmission.
It means treasure.
And Terma are like
teachings in a way,
or wisdom teachings, that are
waiting for specific teachers
in time and space.
And the story
through the Tibetans is that a lot of the
Terma would-- their lineage Terma were
dropped by their great teacher
PadmasambhÄva, who is the second Buddha,
and he kind of emanated these
Termas into the future. And,
like, dropping them like-- kind
of a bit like depth charges,
you know? At different levels of depths
of time. And that they would
go off at certain points
where further emanations,
or disciples of his, or teachers,
or really they're kind of aspects of his
greater consciousness, or that being,
that lineage, you could say,
is better to say. And then they would pick
up and they would go off and be discovered
at certain times,
in certain places and periods.
And this was a great
-- a big-- it was a big shift
in my understanding when I really
understood about these Terma, because
that's sort of what happened to me.
I had this kind of opening up that was
just hanging there in time and space.
And then this wisdom memory came rushing
through me, and then
I had to spend the rest of my life,
and I still am, figuring out what I'd
received, and living according to it.
And I think that's
-- I mentioned it not just because it's
part of my story, but because
it's a lovely little sort of idea of
how subtle and rich are the layers
that survive time and space.
That kind of, you know-- and it brings
us perhaps to that notion of involution
that we've been thinking about,
which-- maybe we could dive into
that a bit? What is involution, Chris?
Tell us.
Well,
first of all.
I want to stop for a moment,
and then first to celebrate
your receiving of the
Terma of the Gene Keys.
You didn't make those,
you received those and you unpacked them.
You take your responsibility
for your half, but you only have half.
The other half is like the seed
that comes from above.
And once you understand that reincarnation
is a cycle that has a bottom half,
an incarnational half and a top half.
And just as there are a community
of beings in the bottom half of the cycle,
there's also a community
of beings in the top half.
That there's layers, and layers,
and layers of spiritual beings.
It's not just reincarnating human beings,
but there's angelic presences,
and enlightened beings' presences, and all
sorts of beings who are here to help
us gestate in our gestational cycle.
And so just as there are human beings
above
to help us, there are the teachings above
to help and infuse our teachings,
so that there are these gems
of ideas. Gems of empowerment
that-- And so once we have
the understanding that a human being
who becomes aware of the dynamics
of reincarnation, aware of the deep
evolutionary trajectory of the soul
and soul communities,
the way the Tibetans have,
then they naturally begin to track
their great beings through time.
And they track the great
teachings through time.
And they become sensitive to these
diamonds dropping into our minds
at specific-- and the deep
significant patterns to this process.
So, for me, in addition to the detail
of these ideas of-- that there are
Termas, teachings, and that there are
Tulkus,
you know, self-consciously reincarnating
beings. The deeper fabric is
to understand-- begin to understand
the depth and the grandeur
at which reincarnation is operating.
It's not simply a matter of who we
were in the 17th century.
It's really a matter of-- it changes
the parameters of our dialogue
with the universe, and therefore
it changes our sense of what we are
. Because we are a being
that travels through time.
We are a being that has absorbed, and been
in the spiritual world many times,
and we are incarnating more and more
of these diamond teachings
into our body,
into our heart, into our mind.
And
that opens up the playing field
of human experience.
I think it just opens up.
And
I teach at a university,
where the religion of secular
enlightenment is that
the universe appeared by chance.
It's been driven by random mutation.
There's no meaning to your life.
It's all accidental.
And when you die, you're dead, that's it.
When your brain stops, you're dead.
And that just completely--
it's just is such a crushing philosophy.
But this,
which starts on an empirical basis
but then expands through a deeper
appreciation of the dynamics of spiritual
traditions, it restores meaning
back to our lives.
It allows us to play
in a meaningful landscape
of engaging the wisdom of our life
with the wisdom of the universe,
entering.
And the involution is that downward flow
of meaning, and purpose, and beauty,
and truth, into our life.
And then evolution
is our taking it and seeding it
and growing it as best we can
into the circumstances of our life.
I sometimes look at involution as
the future burrowing into the past,
and evolution as the past
spiralling towards the future.
So you've got these two forces.
But you might also look at it as
like Aurobindo,
you know, who I know you also love,
Sri Aurobindo, amazing kind of mind,
and how he describes involution
as seeds kind of sown deep within matter.
So, within matter,
the spirit is there asleep.
Like, take a rock, like a piece of lump
of granite, or a volcano, or a mountain.
You know, inside that mountain
is a sleeping
kind of consciousness of such beauty.
But it's just waiting, it's waiting
for its time. You know,
and everything, like, a plant has it.
And you can see a little bit more of it
in a plant, and in a bird you can see it
more clearly, like it's taking animation.
And then a mammal, it's,
like, even more because it looks at you
in the eyes and it has-- even some of them
have that emotional flavour that humans
have, like dogs and horses.
And then in a human, it's much more,
like, obvious because
you know, we can do this!
So the spirit is-- you know, there's
that notion that it's in, like,
the gems that you speak of.
Like, everything is a gem in matter.
Every tiny atom contains
a seed of a spiritual truth,
and everything is waiting its time.
Everything is on this evolutionary ladder
and where evolution meets involution
is kind of the eternal now.
Just constantly-- as you said,
constantly creating
and just recreating itself.
And also from the notion
of involution and evolution
you can solve,
at some way, I don't know if that's
the right word, but you can penetrate
the old chestnut of free
will and determinism.
Because if you look at it
from the involution perspective,
you might say,
'Well, it's all predetermined because it's
all just sitting there waiting for its
moment to come alive.' But from the view
of evolution, nothing is predetermined,
everything is being created
from this view.
So the two of them together,
like a funnel meeting are like this--
that's the paradox for me,
of-- you know, that's divine science
that Aurobindo, by the way, just
you know really nailed.
I mean, if you're able to read
him, which not everyone is!
It's a challenge!
Like, the layers of subtle nuance
in that man's mind-stream,
in terms of how he penetrated this
information, is extraordinary.
I know he's inspired both of us.
Yes, he has.
And I think you're right.
I think in some ways
it's our everyday experience
that there are aspects of our life
which are highly conditioned.
And it's our everyday experience
that we are not completely
subservient to those conditions.
We have a cubic centimetre of free will,
which we can expand into a
cubic metre of free will.
We choose how we choose to meet
the circumstances of our life.
Whether we incubate choice,
incubate a space
where we look at the options
and really examine deeply what we want
to do, what we want to be,
and enact out of that choice.
And that's something we can expand on.
I mean,
that's how I sort of see what you're doing
in Gene Keys, and correct me if I'm wrong,
you're helping people make
more informed choices, by giving them
an opportunity to sit deeply
with the core, the karmic core,
the swirl of their being.
So they make choices on how to engage and
define the outcome of that score.
Exactly.
Because in Gene Keys, it's very simple,
actually, because you have these
three layers, you know: the
Shadow, Gift and Siddhi, and
Siddhi is the involving seed.
The way I describe it, often,
actually, is the Shadow is the seed.
The Gift is in the centre, is the fruit
-- is the flower, and then the Siddhi
is the fruit,
and the fruit also contains the seed.
There's this whole process of awakening
inside us, where the Shadow suddenly--
you know, our-- what we learn from our
karma, what we learn from our mistakes,
what we learn from our challenges,
becomes this incredible treasure.
And as we unlock it and forgive ourselves,
and learn and evolve, then,
you know, we begin to kind of access
those heightened states of consciousness.
They're actually buried
in those very dense places in creation.
And that's our role as humans,
to kind of find those dense places
and be an intermediary
to help unlock them.
So that's an incredible responsibility.
Yeah.
My sense is over the course of long time,
the shadow seeds become less.
They get evaporated
in the process of reflective awareness.
And so the creative seeds become more,
and the opportunity
to become increasingly transparent to the
intelligence of the universe increase.
And if we extrapolate that,
if that's true,
not only for us individually
but collectively,
and clearly the human race has a long way
to go before it makes
all of its shadow seeds,
because it seems like we have so many
shadow seeds that are driving us now.
But if we just step back and give
the benefit of the doubt,
and assume that what happens
for the individual, which we've seen,
can happen for the collective.
And that humanity as a whole
is in the process, through these
magnificent, deep collective dynamics, of
cooking its past seeds and transcending
its-- the limitations of its past,
and moving forward in time.
Then we have reasons to hope that--
what the greatness
of beings, that we see in
Tulkus, into intimate dialogue
with Termas,
is something that all of humanity
is aspiring to, and all
of humanity can become.
That we can become
-- we are in the process
of becoming a truly--
a species of enlightened beings,
a species where we live in the light,
more than living in the shadows.
I think we're coming out of the shadows
of history into a deeper, deeper,
better tomorrow.
Particularly as we start to understand
the universe a little bit more, or
the parameters of the universe,
and we look out.
You know, I know you've got some wonderful
slides you want to share,
which I think would be a great
backdrop if you want to share them.
When I think about the topics
that we're talking about today,
like - where is reincarnation taking us?
What is the larger scope
and purpose of rebirth?
I just collect these pictures
from the NASA, they send them around
every day, and I collect them,
and I meditate on these pictures.
I try to envision the enormous distances
involved and the millions and billions
of stars that are involved.
And the life that's burgeoning on
so many of these planets,
in so many of these systems.
So that the sheer
fertility,
the profligate fertility
of the universe, and the scale
that the universe is thinking of
in order to create and to manifest
orders, and orders, and orders
of evolving life on this magnitude.
And then
to appreciate that we are part of this.
This
has been the great,
great burden of a one-time-through
metaphysics, the belief that we--
this genius and beauty that we're
seeing in these pictures,
if our life is meaningless,
and if it's all random chance, we don't
get to participate in this greatness.
But if reincarnation is true,
and if we are really not limited
by the time that this little body lives,
and if our mind is going to grow
for countless, countless, countless
incarnations,
then
we become intimately part of
the generative creativity that we see
around us in these vast, magnificent
images
of the universe.
And this then becomes our
playground, you know,
without the physical body,
this is surely where we live.
This is our playground.
And it could be even within
the physical body, you know,
at some deep level,
as a hologram,
you know. That could be a deep truth
that we come to, you know,
the 'as above, so below' truth.
And I know you've experienced some
of that yourself in your experience, your,
you know, journeys.
And so have I.
It's a fundamental truth I hold
at the core of my being, you know,
and in my teachings, also.
Like I-- we have this profile
called a Hologenetic profile.
And I name it that because
it is a map of the inner
workings of our being.
But
it kind of has a fractal
reality that corresponds way beyond
this
micro-organism here, of one body. It
is replicated throughout the cosmos.
Yeah.
Yeah a lot of the great
super-alchemical teachings of the Taoists,
for example, have explored this in their
deep, you know, studies
of-- and meditations.
Where you go within and you find
the galaxies and the stars,
and where they exist
in the glands of the body and how
everything has a correspondence.
And therefore,
knowing those correspondences
allows your awareness to travel into that
reality and outside your physical body.
That's, you know, as many people have,
well, experienced that in dreams,
or in astral projection, or deep
meditation, or psychedelic journeying.
I mean, feel free to share some
of your experiences in that.
Well,
I've done that as carefully as I can in my
book 'LSD and the Mind of the Universe'.
But I think the invitation
is to appreciate
-- I mean, look, we only became
conscious of the mother universe about
5000 years ago. We began to have
sufficient discipline
to drop beneath the conditioning
of our individual egoic mind,
and to tap into that stream
of consciousness that we
share with all life.
We've been walking upright
for 5.8 million years,
we've only-- we've been operating
with our larger brain about
200,000 years.
Writing came in about 5000 years ago.
The Upanishadic breakthroughs
came in about
3000-4000 years ago.
But these are nothing
compared to the billions and billions
of years that lie ahead of us.
We're just waking up.
We're just waking up to who we are.
And so, naturally, we kind of
get confused given the enormity
of what we're going into.
But I think the meditation exercises
that you're describing in those
philosophical and spiritual traditions,
which have begun to recognise
the correspondence between
the above and the below,
naturally, we begin to enter into
exercises where we intentionally,
sort of, reinforce
the hybrid nature of our life. That we are
a spiritual being,
and we are a physical being.
We are both pure light,
and we are pure green.
And there are correspondences
in our body which correspond
to the realities out there.
And the more we can internalise
and reinforce them and strengthen them
in our meditational exercises,
then we become a more conscious
mixing pot.
A more conscious
kind of mortar and pestle,
integrating the above and the below.
And if we keep this up for a few
tens of thousands of years,
and a few millions of years, I mean I--
sometimes I tell my students the only
serious question we should be asking
ourselves is - what do you
want to be in a million years?
Because you're going to be here
in a million years.
So let's get down to it.
What is our deepest heart's desire?
What can we do?
The fundamental question.
I heard, a couple of weeks ago,
I heard a really interesting talk
by Roger Penrose, you know him?
Really imaginative,
top-level physicist in the world today.
And he was saying how--
because
there's this notion that the universe,
as it's expanding in physics,
it's getting further,
and further apart and slowing down.
It's going to reach steady-state.
And then we're all going to end up in this
kind of slightly distant, dead, lonely
kind of stopping point.
And that wasn't his-- that's
not his intuition.
Or, at least,
the way he describes it, is that when
you reach that stopping point,
it's the same as if you've gone incredibly
fast. As if everything's
come together again,
because one end of the spectrum
meets the other end of the spectrum.
So you wouldn't be able to tell
if things are slowing down.
It actually might be that they look
like they're speeding up. And,
anyway, so this is my paraphrasing
what he said.
But the thing that really blew me away,
from a physicist to say, was that he said
the way he would understand
it is that the logic
and the kind of elegance
of the universe would be such that that
kind of condensing point would then give
birth to another universe, out of itself.
Like, which seems to be
the-- an elegant logic that the universe
already does,
as we started by saying rebirth and then
leads to another birth. And another aeon.
But then he even went further, and he said
the background radiation
that we see with-- through our furthest
telescopes, that can now see, like,
the very, very beginnings of the universe.
He said there are certain objects
that we're seeing in there, and I can't
quite remember what he called them,
but there are certain shapes
and patterns and things that you're
seeing, and you see them
over and over again.
And
his assumption
was that those were the leftovers
from the previous aeon,
from the previous universe
that we're seeing,
and that really blew me away.
I was like, 'Wow,
that's from a physicist!'
Who's willing to
kind of-- who's kind of reached the top
of his game, he's able
to kind of take a few leaps.
But that really seemed
to me to be [inaudible].
I've heard Ervin László describe
the-- once you reflect
on the extraordinary precision
of the unfolding of our
universe in the Big Bang,
the magnitude of the perfection
of the balance of elements that had to be
present in the first picoseconds
for it to unfold as it has,
then
his hypothesis was,
'Well, do we think that this is the
first time the universe has tried this?'
There have been expansions
and contractions,
and expansions and contractions,
and the universe is learning.
And
perhaps this isn't the first Big Bang.
Perhaps this is the 1000th Big Bang.
And it's gotten-- it's learned
from its previous experiences,
and that's that background radiation,
the traces of which are there.
It's constantly ironing out flaws, and
perfecting, and perfecting,
and perfecting itself.
Yeah.
Of course
this wide view.
I think it's rich to take the wide view,
to take the deep view,
and to look at very special developed
beings who are kind of pushing the edge
of this large view.
But I want to bring it back down to -
Okay, how does this
impact me, here, today?
How does this help me live
with the immediate problems
that I'm dealing with, or with the
immediate choices that I'm living with?
And I think it does, in the sense that
by-- it's an invitation
to look at our life
as an intentional, intelligent
convocation of circumstances,
not as a meaningless and not as a
blind, deterministic
combination of circumstances.
And if we engage our life circumstances as a--
an intentional challenge
chosen us-- chosen for us, by us,
at a time when we knew more,
and we start to make choices in terms
of-- out of a deeper sense of engagement.
That our choice does matter.
Even if we don't see how it changes
things immediately, we can trust that it
does change things in the long term.
Then I think
we will find that life changes,
the circumstances of our life changes.
Things that were hard become soft,
things that were barren becomes richer.
That's your experience
I'm sure with Gene Keys.
Yeah.
And it gives
us like-- for me, it gives us
like a different kind of backdrop
with which to
tackle the problems of the world.
So the problems that we see today
around us, that worry us so much,
it gives us an empowered view
from a much wider view.
Like, to look at what we've just been
looking at, those
cosmic background images.
And then you come to the world today
and you look at this tiny little
blue planet, with its problems,
and, you know-- and they're very real
and they're causing
a great deal of suffering.
They always have done.
But
they're now more easily
seen than ever before.
And we've enacted them globally
because of our technology.
So
we are, you know-- it means that, for me,
I'm constantly reminding people that,
you know, action that comes
from a state of trust is very different
from action that comes from fear.
If we can dive into that field of wider
trust, and we begin to make friends
with our own death. You know,
instead of being-- it being something
that's kind of like, 'Ugh, it's coming.
You know, I'm running out of time.'
Instead of, like, that view, and having
this long-term view as an individual.
And even, like, what I'm doing
as a community,
how about if a whole community
of people on the same wavelength
play with this together? Like,
we're all going to come back,
you know, we're going to return,
and we're going to return into this same
-- I mean this is why I've
created these teachings
-- I haven't created them, they've
appeared,
because
we can come back into them.
And we can begin to, like
-- and the teachings
are just the teachings.
They're just enable us to kind-- to give
a focal point so that we can do our work,
our continuous, progressive
evolutionary work as communities,
rather than like, 'Okay, you've done
this great work, and then you've gone.
And yeah, I might be reborn, but where?'
If you're born into the same community
of beings, of souls, who are all committed
to transmuting karma of the planet,
and come in with different gifts, and
genius, and skills,
in different locations around the world,
but we're interconnected
through the Internet, and through
our body of teachings that kind of
have a resonance in our soul.
So we recognise them again,
even as a child.
You know, and synchronicity
helps us to find them. Suddenly,
it's a different playground again!
You don't have to say goodbye
to all your loved ones forever.
You're going to remember them in different
way-- you're going to bring
more of that awareness
down through the transitionary
Bardo. And bring it--
and the more of us do that,
that incarnate the memory through
the Bardos forwards in time, the more
it kind-- this is my intuition,
the more it will open up
the Bardos themselves,
so that more and more
people can remember.
And it's all a game of memory, I think,
that, you know, like, the more awareness we-- the
more we play and participate,
the more that memory opens up.
Because memory is
a strange thing, isn't it?
Like, even individual memory?
You can-- there are memory tricks
you can do, to, you know--
and therapeutically you can take
someone back into their memories.
So there are things that you can do
to enhance memory.
And there are things you can do
forwards in time to ensure
that you don't forget.
There
are triggers,
you know, that you can-- I mean,
there are lots of ways of playing
with this, but there are things you can do
as the Lamas do, you know, the Tulkus.
They sometimes leave objects
that they retrieve in the next life.
You know, and there are lots of tricks.
Within-- once you know, the time-- you know once you've
kind of found a way through the wormholes,
I think you can play more.
And then we can
bring more and more awakening,
you know, into the collective.
You know, and I think
that that changes everything.
It does.
I think we're shifting slowly from
living an ego-based life which is grounded
in this incarnation,
to living a soul-life
which is grounded into this much,
much deeper life in the universe.
It always struck me as significant
that in the classical story
of the Buddha's enlightenment and he went
through the four watches of the night,
in one of the watches of the night,
he saw all of his former lives.
They all became living
part of his awareness.
Now,
to see your former lives,
to remember your former lives.
It's not simply to remember who you were,
but you bring all of that life
experience into who you are.
So for me to see, to remember your
former lives, is to become the soul
which gathers all that knowledge
and all that experience into one place.
And when he did that, he became
transparent and shattered.
He stopped the suffering.
And the suffering is fundamentally
living small, living as if this
body is the only thing that is you.
And I think this is
happening historically.
We are-- as you say,
the more we bring that memory forward,
the more we live that memory, the more
we see that memory into the future.
Another way of saying this is to say
- we are practising the skills of soul,
inside time and space.
And as our soul gets stronger,
we begin to remember
and have an intuitive feeling
for relationships
that we have a deeper history with.
And if people come at us as enemies,
well, let's heal them.
I'm sorry what I did to you,
whatever it was,
let me make it up to you.
But more and more allies come.
Because there's a-- waking
up is a social process.
It's a generative process which has never,
ever been private, at any time in history.
And I think this is what's happening.
I think the soul
is waking up
inside time and space.
That the human species
is basically growing up
on a scale the likes of which is really
comparable about like 200,000 years ago
when we made the jump to our bigger brain.
Except now the physical
plant isn't changing.
But the awareness that is supported
by the physical plant seems
to be changing exponentially.
So I know that you and I share a vision
of history, that we're entering into
a very, very challenging time,
a time of darkening shadows.
So I hope in our next conversation,
we can begin to put together
our understanding of the dynamics of this
period of history that we're venturing,
and the dynamics of soul growth.
That we both affirm so deeply.
Yeah.
And how those two fit perfectly together
and what you call the birth
of the diamond soul.
And I also happen to call
it the diamond-awareness.
And it is that memory
that transcends the lifetimes.
And
that maintaining that memory
between lives, it sure is-- I mean,
for one thing,
suddenly
many people who I'm engaged with,
like, they're suddenly excited
by being here, and by returning.
As opposed to 'I want to get out
of here,' which has been the prevalent
kind of feeling among
spiritual communities.
'I want to get out of here.
You know, this is my last
incarnation, I'm off.'
And that's-- I think there's a more
compassionate view,
and I think a more exciting view.
That
we can actually bring-- you know and
it's like a warrior's view as well.
Spiritual warrior. Like,
this place needs us,
it needs us here to do this work.
So
yeah I think that's why we're
having these conversations, for me.
I don't think the creative genius
that gave birth to the galaxies,
and planets inside the galaxies,
and solar systems, would inculcate--
and it created reincarnation.
We didn't create it.
The religions didn't create it.
Nature created it.
And I don't think it would create
reincarnation to grow us to an awareness
of our first inkling of our deep,
deep spiritual essence,
with the purpose being, 'Okay, then you
can go, then you can go.'
I think we've missed it.
We don't understand that awakening
is part of-- it is a process which
really is part of the transformation
of time and space itself.
That we are here to change.
We are changing the world.
It really is heaven on Earth,
is what the process is about.
Yeah, and the prophecy.
And the prophecy, yeah.
Let's leave that as a seed for next time.
That sounds good.
Wonderful.
Thank you, Chris.
What a fantastic [inaudible].
And I'll just leave with this thought.
I wonder what our personal former-life
history is, that we meet in such ease
and fruitful dialogue, you and I
. And so I honour the history
between us, whatever it is.
I will contemplate that.
Yeah.
Much love.
Great.
Thank you.